Date: 24 Sep 2011
Categories: rails, factory_girl
Summary: Using factory_girl to create several instances of a class that belongs to another class causes a Validation failed error. This happens because each instance tries to automatically create the object to which it belongs. However since the first instance creates it, the following instances crash because the object already exists.

# factory_girl Validation failed 

Using [factory_girl][factory_girl_github] to create several instances of a class that belongs to
another class causes a Validation failed error.

This happens because each instance tries to automatically create the object to
which it belongs. However since the first instance creates it, the following
instances crash because the object already exists.

I have been struggling to solve this problem and it seems finally I arrived
to a satisfactory solution.

The problem arises when there is a one to many relationship between to classes
and I try to create several instances of a class.

In my case I have a subdomain which has many users:

    class Subdomain < ActiveRecord::Base
      validates_uniqueness_of :name, :case_sensitive => false
      has_many :users
    end
    class User < ActiveRecord::Base
      belongs_to: subdomain
    end

The factories are as follows:

    FactoryGirl.define do
      factory :subdomain do
        name 'test-subdomain'
      end
      factory :user do
        subdomain
        email 'test-user@example.com'
        password '123456¿
        password_confirmation '123456'
      end
    end

When I try to create two users using the following code:

    FactoryGirl.create(:user, :email => "first@example.com")
    FactoryGirl.create(:user, :email => "second@example.com")

I get the following error:

    Validation failed: Name has already been taken (ActiveRecord::RecordInvalid)

This happens because when the first user is created, the default subdomain is
created too and when the second user is created the subdomain already exists.

If we want to use the same subdomain for both users we can do the following:

    s = FactoryGirl.create(:subdomain)
    FactoryGirl.create(:user, :email => "first@example.com", :subdomain => s)
    FactoryGirl.create(:user, :email => "second@example.com", :subdomain => s)

However as our has_many relations become deeper, test data creation becomes more complex.

My solution to this problem is as to change the factory for user:

    factory :user do
      subdomain { Subdomain.find_by_name('test-subdomain') || FactoryGirl.create(:subdomain) }
      email 'test-user@example.com'
      password '123456'
      password_confirmation '123456'
    end

In this case the factory uses the default subdomain if it already exists,
avoiding the validation problem.

Now if we use the initial code, it works without problem, assigning both users
to the default subdomain

    FactoryGirl.create(:user, :email => "first@example.com")
    FactoryGirl.create(:user, :email => "second@example.com")

However this does not limit us to use the same subdomain for all users:

    other_subdomain = FactoryGirl.create(:subdomain, :name => "other-subdomain")

    FactoryGirl.create(:user, :email => "first@example.com", :subdomain => other_subdomain)
    FactoryGirl.create(:user, :email => "second@example.com")

In this case, the first user is assigned to other-subdomain and the second user is assigned
to test-subdomain.

[factory_girl_github]: https://github.com/thoughtbot/factory_girl

