Date: 10 Sep 2010
Categories: rails, ubuntu
Summary:  In this post you will find the steps to install git, rvm, ruby and Rails on Ubuntu.


# How to install Rails 3 on Ubuntu

In this post you will find the steps to install the Ruby on Rails development environment on Ubuntu 10.04.

* [Install and configure git](#git)
* [Install rvm](#rvm)
* [Install ruby using rvm](#ruby)
* [Install rails](#rails)
* [Create and test a rails app](#test)
* [Create your project's rvm file](#rvmrc)

## <a name="git">Install and configure git</a>

    $ sudo apt-get install git-core
    $ git config --global user.name "Your name"
    $ git config --global user.email your_email

If you want git's graphical interfaces install
   
    $ sudo apt-get install gitk
    $ sudo apt-get install git-gui

## <a name="rvm">Install rvm</a>

    $ sudo apt-get install curl
    $ bash < <( curl http://rvm.beginrescueend.com/releases/rvm-install-head )

### Edit .bashrc
Change the line that contains

    [ -z "$PS1" ] && return

near the beginning of the file to 

    if [[ -n "$PS1" ]] ; then

Indent all the remaining lines of the file and add a line containing

    fi

at the end of the file.

Add another line at the end (after fi) containing

    [[ -s "$HOME/.rvm/scripts/rvm" ]] && source "$HOME/.rvm/scripts/rvm"

and save your .bashrc file.

Close the terminal, open a new one and type 

    $ type rvm | head -n1

(number one, not letter l)

If everything is working you should see

    rvm is a function

Note: After installing rvm do not use sudo to install gems.

## <a name = "ruby">Install ruby using rvm</a>
Install the following packages required to build ruby:

    $ sudo apt-get install build-essential bison openssl libreadline5 libreadline-dev zlib1g zlib1g-dev libssl-dev libsqlite3-0 libsqlite3-dev sqlite3 libreadline-dev libxml2-dev

the list of packages was obtained by typing 

    $ rvm notes

Install the required ruby version and select it. In my case I will install only Ruby Enterprise Edition

    $ rvm install ree
    $ rvm use ree

Create a gemset and select it

    $ rvm gemset create mygemset
    $ rvm gemset use mygemset

## <a name = "rails">Install rails</a>
    
    $ gem install rails -v 3.0.0

## <a name = "test">Create and test a rails app</a>

    $ gem install sqlite3-ruby
    $ rails new myproject
    $ cd myproject
    $ rails generate scaffold User name:string
    $ rake db:migrate
    $ rails server

In your browser navigate to http://localhost:3000, you should see the default rails page.

Navigate to http://localhost:3000/users and play with your new app creating, editing and erasing users.

## <a name = "rvmrc">Create your project's rvm file</a>
    $ echo "rvm ree@mygemset" >> .rvmrc

